SIP-030: Wallet RPC Standards (#166)
stacksgov/sips: sips/sip-030/sip-030-wallet-interface.md

# Preamble

SIP Number: `030`

Title: Integration of a Modern Stacks Wallet Interface Standard

Authors: [aryzing](https://github.com/aryzing), [janniks](https://github.com/janniks), [kyranjamie](https://github.com/kyranjamie),  [m-aboelenein](https://github.com/m-aboelenein)

> 

Reviewer: Missing 'Consideration' field in the Preamble:  Please add this field and specify the appropriate consideration(s), such as 'Technical'.

Author: For the `Type` field is there a category "non consensus breaking standard"?

Type: Standard

Status: Draft

Created: 10 October 2023

License: BSD 2-Clause

# OPEN QUESTIONS

> <!-- todo: remove section before merge -->

Reviewer: reminder to address these and remove open questions section

- [ ] Should a global single `window.` object be used, or should provider discovery be handled complely differently?
- [ ] Rename `stx_transferFt` to include SIP010 somewhere?
- [ ] Should listeners have params? (e.g. txid for tx mined event)

# Abstract

This SIP proposes common RPC methods to use for the Stacks blockchain's "Connect" and "Auth" systems.
The goal is to replace the current Connect interface, primarily used by web applications to connect with browser extensions and mobile apps with a more straightforward protocol.
This proposal's goal is to standardize JSON compatible interfaces for use with wallet interfaces.

> 

Reviewer: Missing 'Copyright' section here

Author: Haven't seen that in other sips, what should it look like?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-000/sip-000-stacks-improvement-proposal-process.md?plain=1#L156

> # Motivation

Reviewer: 'Motivation' section should be renamed 'Introduction'?: The SIP Specification requires an 'Introduction' section that provides a high-level summary of the problem(s) and how the proposal solves them.

The current Connect system, which has existed for several years, is primarily utilized by web applications for interfacing with wallets.
However, many aspects of the existing "Connect" and "Auth" libraries are no longer required, leading to unnecessary complexity (e.g., wrapping RPC payloads in jsontokens) and brittleness (e.g., undefined serialization for non-JSON compatible data structures) in wallet connectivity.

Recent attempts to standardize the interface (https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/pull/59, https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/issues/117) have sparked valuable discussions but have not culminated in a ratified standard, largely due to the stable state of the existing system.
This SIP aims to address these issues by adopting the WBIPs standards, which offer a more suitable RPC-style interface for modern web applications.

> The simplified protocol will allow integration without heavy dependencies (like Auth) and provider a more extendable interface for wallets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplified protocol will allow integration without heavy dependencies (like Auth) and provide a more extendable interface for wallets.
```
fix typo

Additionally, this SIP is motivated by the increased traffic of Ordinal inscriptions on Bitcoin and the Stacks ecosystem growing closer to Bitcoin.
The community has recognized the need for a more unified approach to wallet connectivity (e.g. Bitcoin and PSBTs for previously Stacks-only wallets).
By adopting the new standard, we aim to align the community towards a common and modern protocol for wallet interaction in web applications.
Importantly, the decision to use an existing standard (rather than designing a new one or reworking Auth) is intentional — to avoid further division or split ownership within the community.

There was an attempt to re-use existing standards/protocols from other ecosystems via the WBIPs working group — but no consensus was found that was a perfect fit or had enough traction for the larger layer-2 ecosystem.
So this SIP aims to capture the important features for the Stacks ecosystem, with a focus on extensibility.

# Specification

The proposed changes are listed as follows:

Specify [JSON-RPC 2.0](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification) compatible methods and payloads for wallet interaction.

> These can be used via a browser object (i.e., via the `window.btc.request` method) or similar interfaces like WalletConnect.

Reviewer 3: Should we remove reference to `.btc`? 

```suggestion
These can be used via a browser object (i.e., via the `window.WalletProvider.request` method) or similar interfaces like WalletConnect.
```

> 

Reviewer: Missing 'Related Work' section: summarize alternative solutions and explain why they are not adequate.

# Backwards Compatibility

The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.
Wallets implementing the new standard may maintain the previous system to support legacy applications during a transition period or indefinitely.
Existing applications using the current Auth system should continue to operate, but immediate changes are recommended once this SIP is ratified.

> 

Reviewer: Missing 'Activation' section: please describe the timeline, criteria, and process for activating the SIP once it is ratified.

Reviewer 2: @janniks this section is where you can define your existing "ratification" section. and example you may use is: https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-012/sip-012-cost-limits-network-upgrade.md#activation-criteria

Author: Renamed to activation 👍

> # Implementation

Reviewer: rename to 'Reference Implementations' ?

## Notes on Serialization

To adhere to a generic serializability, the following notes are given:

- Enums are serialized as human-readable strings.
- BigInts are serialized as numbers, strings, or anything that can be parsed by the JavaScript BigInt constructor.
- Bytes are serialized as hex-encoded strings (without a 0x prefix).
- Predefined formats from previous SIPs are used where applicable.
- Addresses are serialized as Stacks c32-encoded strings.
- Clarity values, post-conditions, and transactions are serialized to bytes (defined by SIP-005) and used as hex-encoded strings.

## Methods

This section defines the available methods, their parameters, and result structure.
Parameters should be considered only as recommendations for the wallet, and the user/wallet may choose to ignore or override them.

> Note: Optional params are marked with a `?`.

Methods can be namespaced under `stx_` if used in more generic settings and other more Ethereum inspired domains.
In other cases (e.g. `WalletConnect`), the namespace may already be given by metadata (e.g. a `chainId` field) and can be omitted.

> On the predominant `StacksProvider` global object, the methods can be used without a namespace, but wallets may add namespaced aliases for convenience.

Author: That's definitely an idea. We should check with Xverse and discuss the latest thoughts on wallet-standard and Reown as well.

#### Transaction method general params

The following definitions can be used in the transaction methods.

`params`

- `address?`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, defaults to wallets current address
- `network?`: `'mainnet' | 'testnet' | 'regtest' | 'mocknet'`
- `fee?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `nonce?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value

> - `attachment?`: `string` hex-encoded

Reviewer 4: Are attachments still a thing? We moved on to StackerDBs

Reviewer 5: I've been considering opening a (separate) SIP to deprecate the Atlas subsystem now that nothing is using it.

In that vein, it may be more appropriate to call this field something non-Atlas-specific, like `content-hash`.  Then, it could be used by clients to authenticate off-chain content obtained from StackerDB or somesuch system.

Author: If it's not super clear when and how the content hashes would be used going forward, I'll err on the side of removing it completely (for now) — wallets can still decide to add it later

## Listeners

In addition to the request interface, event listeners may be provided via the `.listen` method.

- `provider.listen(event: string, listener: (...args: any[]) => void): Function`

> `provider.listen` should return a "unlisten" function, which can be called to remove the listener.

The event name should be closer to nouns than verbs and doesn't use the `on` prefix from DOM naming conventions.

### Event `accountChange`

`listener: (accounts: {}[]) => void`

> `accounts` as defined above in `stx_getAccounts`.
> The first account is considered the default account (and may be the only "active" account in a wallet).

## Error Codes

Errors thrown by request methods should match existing JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes.
This way, the user or an intermediary library can handle them in a standardized way.
Otherwise, no additional error codes are defined in this SIP.

## JSON Representations

While discussing this SIP, it has become clear that the current Stacks.js representation is confusing to developers.
Rather, a better solution would be human-readable — for example, rely on string literal enumeration, rather than magic values, which need additional lookups.

> Relying on soley a hex-encoded also poses difficulties when building Stacks enabled web applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relying solely on hex-encoded also poses difficulties when building Stacks-enabled web applications.
```
fix grammar/spelling

# Preamble

SIP Number: `To be assigned`

Title: Integration of a Modern Stacks Wallet Interface Standard

> Authors: [janniks](https://github.com/janniks), [kyranjamie](https://github.com/kyranjamie), [aryzing](https://github.com/aryzing), [m-aboelenein](https://github.com/m-aboelenein)

Reviewer 2: Sort alphabetically please

Type: Standard

Status: Draft

Created: 10 October 2023

License: BSD 2-Clause

# OPEN QUESTIONS

<!-- todo: remove section before merge -->

- [ ] Should a global single `window.` object be used, or should provider discovery be handled complely differently?
- [ ] Rename `stx_transferFt` to include SIP010 somewhere?
- [ ] Should listeners have params? (e.g. txid for tx mined event)

# Abstract

> This SIP proposes the integration of the standard into the Stacks blockchain's "Connect" and "Auth" system.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing: "...integration of the standard into the Stacks..."
in this context, what is *the standard*?

> The goal is to replace the current Connect interface, primarily used by web applications to connect with browser extensions and mobile apps, with a more straightforward protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal is to replace the current Connect interface, primarily used by web applications to connect with browser extensions and mobile apps with a more straightforward protocol.
```

> The proposal consists mainly of standardizing JSON compatible interfaces for use with wallet interfaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal's goal is to standardize JSON compatible interfaces for use with wallet interfaces.
```

# Motivation

> The current Connect system, which has evolved since the Blockstack era, is primarily utilized by web applications for interfacing with wallets.

Reviewer 2: Unless this will be annotated or linked, i would change "which has evolved since the Blockstack era" to something more generic like: "which has existed for several years, ..."
or, remove that part of the sentence altogether unless it's more relevant later on (still reading)

> However, many aspects of the existing "Connect" and "Auth" libraries are no longer required, leading to unnecessary complexity and brittleness in wallet connectivity.

Reviewer 2: Can you list a few things that are no longer required to give the reader of how this may be brittle?

> Recent attempts to standardize the interface have sparked valuable discussions but have not culminated in a ratified standard, largely due to the stable state of the existing system.

Reviewer 2: Assuming there are public discussions here, can you annotate and link to them?

This SIP aims to address these issues by adopting the WBIPs standards, which offer a more suitable RPC-style interface for modern web applications.
The simplified protocol will allow integration without heavy dependencies (like Auth) and provider a more extendable interface for wallets.

> Additionally, this SIP is motivated by the increased traffic of Ordinal inscriptions on Bitcoin and the Stacks ecosystem growing closers to Bitcoin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, this SIP is motivated by the increased traffic of Ordinal inscriptions on Bitcoin and the Stacks ecosystem growing closer to Bitcoin.
```

The community has recognized the need for a more unified approach to wallet connectivity (e.g. Bitcoin and PSBTs for previously Stacks-only wallets).

> By adopting the new standard, we aim to align the community towards a common and modern protocol for wallet interaction in web applications.

Reviewer 2: this is interesting - does this proposal only affect these web application interactions, or would offline users also benefit from this change?

Author: Theoretically, the RPC standard can be used anywhere. e.g. we could have the CLI options align with the RPC as well. But web is the largest driver (although the sip intends to be more or less runtime agnostic)

Importantly, the decision to use an existing standard (rather than designing a new one or reworking Auth) is intentional — to avoid further division or split ownership within the community.

> There was an attempt to re-use existing standards/protocols from other ecosystems via the WBIPs working group — but no consensus was found that was a perfect fit or had enough traction for the larger layer-2 ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: If those discussions are public, can you annotate/link here?

So this SIP aims to capture the important features for the Stacks ecosystem, with a focus on extensibility.

# Specification

The proposed changes are listed as follows:

> Specify JSON-RPC 2.0 compatible methods and payloads for wallet interaction.

Reviewer 2: nit: please add a link or annotation to the JSON-RPC 2.0 spec

These can be used via a browser object (i.e., via the `window.btc.request` method) or similar interfaces like WalletConnect.

# Backwards Compatibility

The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.

> However, wallets implementing the new standard are advised to maintain the previous system to support legacy applications during a transition period.

Reviewer 2: how will they be advised here?
maybe reword slightly:
```
...new standard should also maintain the previous...
```

if we leave in "are advised", it's something that should be mentioned in the SIP as to how that advisory will take place.

> Existing applications using the current Auth system should continue to operate, but immediate changes are recommended once this SIP is ratified.

Reviewer 2: "should" or "shall"?
`should` implies we don't know if it would work. i think this is a wording issue, i can't image a wallet would stop working immediately if this proposal is approved.

> The Connect library should go live with the new standard, once most major wallets have adopted the new standard.

Reviewer 2: I don't like the wording here, it opens up a lot of potential questions that aren't likely to be in this SIP. 

i think you can reword it to reflect a timeframe, rather than a nebulous "once most major wallets have adopted". 
otherwise, i think you'll have to enumerate which wallets will need to be updated, and how much time will be provided for that upgrade.

Author: True, I'll try to add it to the ratifying section

# Implementation

## Notes on Serialization

> These methods are based on JSON-RPC 2.0 for serialization.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is needed - JSON-RPC is already part of the specification section. it's implied that serialization would follow that standard.

> To adhere to a generic serializability, the following notes are given.
> Enums are serialized as human-readable strings.
> BigInts are serialized as numbers, strings, or anything that can be parsed by the JavaScript BigInt constructor.
> Bytes are serialized as hex-encoded strings (without a 0x prefix).
> Predefined formats from previous SIPs are used where applicable.
> Addresses are serialized as Stacks c32-encoded strings.
> Clarity values, post-conditions, and transactions are serialized to bytes (defined by SIP-005) and used as hex-encoded strings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To adhere to a generic serializability, the following notes are given:
- Enums are serialized as human-readable strings.
- BigInts are serialized as numbers, strings, or anything that can be parsed by the JavaScript BigInt constructor.
- Bytes are serialized as hex-encoded strings (without a 0x prefix).
- Predefined formats from previous SIPs are used where applicable.
- Addresses are serialized as Stacks c32-encoded strings.
- Clarity values, post-conditions, and transactions are serialized to bytes (defined by SIP-005) and used as hex-encoded strings.
```

## Methods

This section defines the available methods, their parameters, and result structure.
Parameters should be considered recommendations for the wallet.
The user/wallet may choose to ignore/override them.

> Optional params are marked with a `?`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Note: *Optional params are marked with a `?`.
```

Methods can be namespaced under `stx_` if used in more generic settings and other more Ethereum inspired domains.

> In other cases (e.g. WalletConnect), the namespace may already be given by meta-data (e.g. a `chainId` field) and can be omitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other cases (e.g. `WalletConnect`), the namespace may already be given by meta-data (e.g. a `chainId` field) and can be omitted.
```

On the predominant `StacksProvider` global object, the methods can be used without a namespace, but wallets may add namespaced aliases for convenience.

#### Transaction method general params

The following definitions can be used in the transaction methods.

`params`

- `address?`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, defaults to wallets current address
- `network?`: `'mainnet' | 'testnet' | 'regtest' | 'mocknet'`
- `fee?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `nonce?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `attachment?`: `string` hex-encoded
- `postConditions?`: `PostCondition[]`, defaults to `[]`
- `postConditionMode?`: `'allow' | 'deny'`
- `sponsored?`: `boolean`, defaults to `false`
- ~~`appDetails`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onFinish`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onCancel`~~ _removed_

`where`

- `PostCondition`: `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation

---

> ### Method `stx_transferStx`

Reviewer 2: The structure here seems a little ill-suited. have you considered a table vs markdown lists?
the text for all of the methods seems fine, i just think the data can be presented to the reader in an easier to consume format.

Reviewer 2: looking it over again, maybe a table is also ill-suited. 
perhaps some better formatting though?
was thinking about this, ex:
```
### stx_transferSip10Ft

`params`

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `asset`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value

`result`

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction
```

Author: Yeah, table is also tricky. I'll try alternate headings and change how the `where` adds an additional unneeded section.

### Event `accountChange`

`listener: (accounts: {}[]) => void`

> `accounts` as defined above in `stx_getAccounts`.
> The first account is considered the default account (and may be the only "active" account in a wallet).

## Error Codes

Errors thrown by request methods should match existing JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes.
This way, the user or an intermediary library can handle them in a standardized way.
Otherwise, no additional error codes are defined in this SIP.

## JSON Representations

While discussing this SIP, it has become clear that the current Stacks.js representation is confusing to developers.
Rather, a better solution would be human-readable — for example, rely on string literal enumeration, rather than magic values, which need additional lookups.
Relying on soley a hex-encoded also poses difficulties when building Stacks enabled web applications.

### Clarity values

Proposed below is an updated interface representation for Clarity primitives for use in Stacks.js and JSON compatible environments.

> **Comment**: For encoding larger than JS `Number` big integers, `string` is used.

> `0x00` `int`

Reviewer 2: nit: this are of type json, not ts

```ts
{
  type: 'int',
  value: string // `bigint` compatible
}
```

`0x01` `uint`

```ts
{
  type: 'uint',
  value: string // `bigint` compatible
}
```

`0x02` `buffer`

```ts
{
  type: 'buffer',
  value: string // hex-encoded string
}
```

`0x03` `bool` `true`

```ts
{
  type: 'true',
}
```

`0x04` `bool` `false`

```ts
{
  type: 'false',
}
```

`0x05` `address` (aka "standard principal")

```ts
{
  type: 'address',
  value: string // Stacks c32-encoded
}
```

`0x06` `contract` (aka "contract principal")

```ts
{
  type: 'contract',

>   value: `${string}.${string}` // Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix

Reviewer 2: this is in several places, but are backticks intended? in a codeblock, they show up as typed

Author: Yes, this is a typescript string type, which essentially constrains string type to a subset, matching the expected criteria (not doing much in this case, e.g. it would likely only fail on a string ending with a period; but it's also nice for developer understanding and type hinting in IDEs — this same type could be used in TS codebases)

  condition: 'sent' | 'not-sent',
  asset: `${string}.${string}::${string}` // address with contract name suffix with asset suffix, Stacks c32-encoded
  assetId: object, // Clarity value
}
```

### Test vectors

Listed below are some examples of the potentially unclear representations:

- `u12` = `{ type: "uint", value: "12" }`
- `0xbeaf` = `{ type: "ascii", value: "hello there" }`
- `"hello there"` = `{ type: "ascii", value: "hello there" }`
- `(list 4 8)` =
  ```
  {
    type: "list",
    value: [
      { type: "int", value: "4"},
      { type: "int", value: "8"},
    ]
  }
  ```
- `(err u4)` =
  ```
  {
    type: "err",
    value: { type: "uint", value: "4"},
  }
  ```
- "sends more than 10000 uSTX" =
  ```
  {
    type: "stx-postcondition",
    address: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6",
    amount: "10000",
    condition: "gt"
  }
  ```
- "does not send the `12` TKN non-fungible token" =
  ```
  {
    type: "ntf-postcondition",
    address: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6.vault"
    asset: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6.tokencoin::tkn",
    assetId: { type: "uint", value: "12" }
    condition: "not-sent"
  }
  ```

## Provider registration

> Wallets can register their aliased provider objects according to WBIP-004.

Reviewer 2: annotate of provide link to this resource please

> # Ratification

Reviewer 2: formatting - all of these H1 markdown headers should be H2 (h2->h3 and so on)

> This SIP is considered ratified after at least two major wallets in the Stacks ecosystem have implemented and launched the new standard.

Reviewer 2: How shall this be independently verified? I'm leaning more towards a timeframe rather than a self-reported metric here.

Author: This part I'm not sure about, yeah. How is it typically done for SIPs?

> Note: Even if it's not widely used yet, wallets are already implementing a lot of this in collaboration of the SIP.

> # Links

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Appendix
```

Reviewer 2: Additionally, i would annotate this section and link where they're referenced above

The simplified protocol will allow integration without heavy dependencies (like Auth) and provide a more extendable interface for wallets.

Additionally, this SIP is motivated by the increased traffic of Ordinal inscriptions on Bitcoin and the Stacks ecosystem growing closer to Bitcoin.
The community has recognized the need for a more unified approach to wallet connectivity (e.g. Bitcoin and PSBTs for previously Stacks-only wallets).
By adopting the new standard, we aim to align the community towards a common and modern protocol for wallet interaction in web applications.
Importantly, the decision to use an existing standard (rather than designing a new one or reworking Auth) is intentional — to avoid further division or split ownership within the community.

There was an attempt to re-use existing standards/protocols from other ecosystems via the WBIPs working group[^11][^26] — but no consensus was found that was a perfect fit or had enough traction for the larger layer-2 ecosystem.
So this SIP aims to capture the important features for the Stacks ecosystem, with a focus on extensibility.

## Specification

The proposed changes are listed as follows:

> Specify [JSON-RPC 2.0](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification) compatible methods and payloads for wallet interaction.

Author: Made it more clear now.

These can be used via a browser object (i.e., via the `window.WalletProvider.request` method) or similar interfaces like WalletConnect.

## Backwards Compatibility

The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.
Wallets implementing the new standard may maintain the previous system to support legacy applications during a transition period or indefinitely.
Existing applications using the current Auth system should continue to operate, but immediate changes are recommended once this SIP is ratified.

> ## Reference Implementations

Reviewer 2: if there is one, i think it would be helpful to share that information here rather than solely describing how the implementation should work. 
is there an existing implementation of this proposal?

i would argue that most of this section should be moved to the Specifications section, since that's what they appear to be defining: specifications, not implementation details.

> ## Reference Implementations

Reviewer 5: Yeah, let's link to a git tag in these projects so readers can have an example of a compliant artifact to study.

### Notes on Serialization

To ensure serializability, consider these notes:

- Enums are serialized as human-readable strings.
- BigInts are serialized as numbers, strings, or anything that can be parsed by the JavaScript BigInt constructor.
- Bytes are serialized as hex-encoded strings (without a 0x prefix).
- Predefined formats from previous SIPs are used where applicable.
- Addresses are serialized as Stacks c32-encoded strings.
- Clarity values, post-conditions, and transactions are serialized to bytes (defined by SIP-005) and used as hex-encoded strings.

> ### Methods

Reviewer 2: +1 - made a comment above about this exact thing before seeing you state the same here.

> ### Methods

Author: The method definitions? They are sort of the largest part of the spec. But we can add more on specs for provider discovery and implementation

> ### Methods

Reviewer 2: yes - i think it's more accurate to have them in the specifications section rather than the implementation section. 
the current text doesn't describe or define an implementation of the specification is my reasoning. 

i referred to https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-000/sip-000-stacks-improvement-proposal-process.md?plain=1#L165-L170  for my reasoning here.

> ### Methods

Reviewer 6: It seems like a better ordering might be:

```diff
diff --git a/sips/sip-030/sip-030-wallet-interface.md b/sips/sip-030/sip-030-wallet-interface.md
index 7e0050a..d825dd5 100644
--- a/sips/sip-030/sip-030-wallet-interface.md
+++ b/sips/sip-030/sip-030-wallet-interface.md
@@ -49,16 +49,6 @@ The proposed changes are listed as follows:
 
 > **Note**: The methods can be used via the mentioned browser object (i.e., via the `window.WalletProvider.request` method), but also through similar interfaces like WalletConnect.
 
-## Backwards Compatibility
-
-The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.
-Notably, app-specific private keys for domains have been removed from the connect protocol, but can still be accessed via the `gaiaAppKey` field in `stx_getAccounts`.
-
-Wallets implementing the new standard may maintain the previous system to support legacy applications during a transition period or indefinitely.
-Existing applications using the current Auth system should continue to operate, but immediate changes are recommended once this SIP is ratified.
-
-## Reference Implementations
-
 ### Notes on Serialization
 
 To ensure serializability, consider these notes:
@@ -522,6 +512,16 @@ Listed below are some examples of the potentially unclear representations:
 Wallets can register their aliased provider objects however they see fit.
 For example, using the WBIP-004[^3] standard or Wallet Standard[^14].
 
+## Backwards Compatibility
+
+The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.
+Notably, app-specific private keys for domains have been removed from the connect protocol, but can still be accessed via the `gaiaAppKey` field in `stx_getAccounts`.
+
+Wallets implementing the new standard may maintain the previous system to support legacy applications during a transition period or indefinitely.
+Existing applications using the current Auth system should continue to operate, but immediate changes are recommended once this SIP is ratified.
+
+## Reference Implementations
+
 ## Activation
 
 This SIP is considered _Ratified_ after at least two wallet providers with significant user adoption (> 10,000 monthly active users) have implemented and launched the new standard.
```

- `nonce?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `postConditions?`: `PostCondition[]`, defaults to `[]`
  - where `PostCondition` is `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation
- `postConditionMode?`: `'allow' | 'deny'`
- `sponsored?`: `boolean`, defaults to `false`
- ~~`attachment?`~~ _removed_
- ~~`appDetails`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onFinish`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onCancel`~~ _removed_

---

#### Method `stx_transferStx`

> **Comment**: This method doesn't take post-conditions.

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `memo?`: `string`, defaults to `''`

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_transferSip10Ft`

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `asset`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

> #### Method `stx_transferSip10Nft`

Reviewer 3: Aren't NFTs Sip9?

Reviewer 4: yes

#### Method `stx_getAddresses`

Result properties

- `addresses`: `{}[]`
  - `address`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
  - `publicKey`: `string` hex-encoded

#### Method `stx_getAccounts`

> **Comment**: This method is similar to `stx_getAddresses`.
> It was added to provide better backwards compatibility for applications using Gaia.

Result properties

- `accounts`: `{}[]`
  - `address`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
  - `publicKey`: `string` hex-encoded
  - `gaiaHubUrl`: `string` URL
  - `gaiaAppKey`: `string` hex-encoded

#### Method `stx_updateProfile`

Parameter properties

- `profile`: `object` Schema.org Person object[^13]

Result properties

- `profile`: `object` updated Schema.org Person object[^13]

### Listeners

In addition to the request interface, event listeners may be provided via the `.listen` method.

- `provider.listen(event: string, listener: (...args: any[]) => void): Function`

> `provider.listen` should return a "unlisten" function, which can be called to remove the listener.

The event name should be closer to nouns than verbs and doesn't use the `on` prefix from DOM naming conventions.

#### Event `accountChange`

> `listener: (accounts: {}[]) => void`

Reviewer 3: Wondering if this is a privacy issue. A user might only wish to share one particular account details with a given app, but this switcher api implicitly shares all account details, (if a user switches to all accounts).

Instead, perhaps we should return only the account index, such that the app can know the account has changed.

  condition: 'sent' | 'not-sent',
  asset: `${string}.${string}::${string}` // address with contract name suffix with asset suffix, Stacks c32-encoded
  assetId: object, // Clarity value
}
```

#### Test vectors

Listed below are some examples of the potentially unclear representations:

- `u12` = `{ type: "uint", value: "12" }`
- `0xbeaf` = `{ type: "ascii", value: "hello there" }`
- `"hello there"` = `{ type: "ascii", value: "hello there" }`
- `(list 4 8)` =
  ```
  {
    type: "list",
    value: [
      { type: "int", value: "4"},
      { type: "int", value: "8"},
    ]
  }
  ```
- `(err u4)` =
  ```
  {
    type: "err",
    value: { type: "uint", value: "4"},
  }
  ```
- "sends more than 10000 uSTX" =
  ```
  {
    type: "stx-postcondition",
    address: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6",
    amount: "10000",
    condition: "gt"
  }
  ```
- "does not send the `12` TKN non-fungible token" =
  ```
  {
    type: "ntf-postcondition",
    address: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6.vault"
    asset: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6.tokencoin::tkn",
    assetId: { type: "uint", value: "12" }
    condition: "not-sent"
  }
  ```

### Provider registration

> Wallets can register their aliased provider objects however they see fit.

Reviewer 4: Is this specific enough? Currently, different wallets use different methods and are not working nicely together.

Author: Yeah, I agree we should add more on provider discovery.

## Preamble

SIP Number: `030`

Title: Integration of a Modern Stacks Wallet Interface Standard

Authors: [aryzing](https://github.com/aryzing), [janniks](https://github.com/janniks), [kyranjamie](https://github.com/kyranjamie), [m-aboelenein](https://github.com/m-aboelenein)

Consideration: Technical

Type: Standard

Status: Draft

Created: 10 October 2023

License: BSD 2-Clause

## Abstract

This SIP proposes common RPC methods to use for the Stacks blockchain's "Connect" and "Auth" systems.
The goal is to replace the current Connect interface, primarily used by web applications to connect with browser extensions and mobile apps with a more straightforward protocol.
This proposal's goal is to standardize JSON compatible interfaces for use with wallet interfaces.

## Introduction

The current Connect system[^15], which has existed for several years, is primarily utilized by web applications for interfacing with wallets.

> However, many aspects of the existing "Connect" and "Auth" libraries are no longer required, leading to unnecessary complexity (e.g., wrapping RPC payloads in jsontokens) and lack of clear definitions (e.g., undefined serialization for non-JSON compatible data structures) in wallet connectivity.

Reviewer 2: `Auth` is mentioned several times in this SIP. i think it would be helpful to define these libraries in a related work section (exists later in this sip): https://github.com/stacksgov/sips/blob/main/sips/sip-000/sip-000-stacks-improvement-proposal-process.md?plain=1#L171

Recent attempts[^21][^22][^23][^24][^25][^26] to standardize the interface have sparked valuable discussions but have not culminated in a ratified standard, largely due to the stable state of the existing system.
This SIP aims to address these issues by adopting the WBIPs standards[^11], which offer a more suitable RPC-style interface for modern web applications.
The simplified protocol will allow integration without heavy dependencies (like Auth) and provide a more extendable interface for wallets.

> Additionally, this SIP is motivated by the increased traffic of Ordinal inscriptions on Bitcoin and the Stacks ecosystem growing closer to Bitcoin.

Reviewer 2: actually, i think the next sentence addresses my concern, but i would slightly change it:
```
The community has recognized the need ...
```
adding a transition like:
```
Specifically, the Stacks community has recognized the need ...
```

The community has recognized the need for a more unified approach to wallet connectivity (e.g. Bitcoin and PSBTs for previously Stacks-only wallets).
By adopting the new standard, we aim to align the community towards a common and modern protocol for wallet interaction in web applications.
Importantly, the decision to use an existing standard (rather than designing a new one or reworking Auth) is intentional — to avoid further division or split ownership within the community.

There was an attempt to re-use existing standards/protocols from other ecosystems via the WBIPs working group[^11][^26] — but no consensus was found that was a perfect fit or had enough traction for the larger layer-2 ecosystem.
So this SIP aims to capture the important features for the Stacks ecosystem, with a focus on extensibility.

## Specification

The proposed changes are listed as follows:

Specify [JSON-RPC 2.0](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification) compatible methods and payloads for wallet interaction.
These can be used via a browser object (i.e., via the `window.WalletProvider.request` method) or similar interfaces like WalletConnect.

## Backwards Compatibility

> The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.

Reviewer 4: Can we mention that most importantly, app private keys for domains have been removed.

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_signTransaction`

Parameter properties

- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

Result properties

- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction (signed)

#### Method `stx_signMessage`

Parameter properties

- `message`: `string`

Result properties

- `signature`: `string` hex-encoded
- `publicKey`: `string` hex-encoded

#### Method `stx_signStructuredMessage`

Parameter properties

- `message`: `ClarityValue`
  - where `ClarityValue` is `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation
- `domain`: `ClarityTupleValue`
  - where `ClarityTupleValue` (defined by SIP-018) is a Clarity "tuple" as `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation

Result properties

- `signature`: `string` hex-encoded
- `publicKey`: `string` hex-encoded

#### Method `stx_getAddresses`

> **Note**: This method can be used similarly to legacy "connect" methods, where the first account selection also acts as an approval of the site/domain.

Result properties

- `addresses`: `{}[]`
  - `address`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded

>   - `publicKey`: `string` hex-encoded

Author: 👍

}
```

#### Test vectors

Listed below are some examples of the potentially unclear representations:

- `u12` = `{ type: "uint", value: "12" }`
- `0xbeaf` = `{ type: "ascii", value: "hello there" }`
- `"hello there"` = `{ type: "ascii", value: "hello there" }`
- `(list 4 8)` =
  ```
  {
    type: "list",
    value: [
      { type: "int", value: "4"},
      { type: "int", value: "8"},
    ]
  }
  ```
- `(err u4)` =
  ```
  {
    type: "err",
    value: { type: "uint", value: "4"},
  }
  ```
- "sends more than 10000 uSTX" =
  ```
  {
    type: "stx-postcondition",
    address: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6",
    amount: "10000",
    condition: "gt"
  }
  ```
- "does not send the `12` TKN non-fungible token" =
  ```
  {
    type: "ntf-postcondition",
    address: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6.vault"
    asset: "STB44HYPYAT2BB2QE513NSP81HTMYWBJP02HPGK6.tokencoin::tkn",
    assetId: { type: "uint", value: "12" }
    condition: "not-sent"
  }
  ```

### Provider registration

Wallets can register their aliased provider objects however they see fit.
For example, using the WBIP-004[^3] standard or Wallet Standard[^14].

## Activation

> This SIP is considered _Ratified_ after Xverse and Leather (currently the largest wallets in the Stacks ecosystem) have implemented and launched the new standard.

Reviewer 2: I'm not a fan of this phrasing - since it gives the impression that these changes are meant to benefit the two largest wallet providers. 

can it be rephrased so something more agnostic, like:
```
This SIP is considered _Ratified_ after at least two wallet providers have implemented and launched the new standard.
```
i'm not sure if it's possible to add some parameters here like "2 wallet providers with x number of downloads/users/dau etc", but that would help qualify it better.

## Preamble

SIP Number: `030`

> Title: Integration of a Modern Stacks Wallet Interface Standard

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Title: Definition of a Modern Stacks Wallet Interface Standard
```

## Backwards Compatibility

The implementation of this proposal is not necessarily backward compatible.
Notably, app-specific private keys for domains have been removed from the connect protocol, but can still be accessed via the `gaiaAppKey` field in `stx_getAccounts`.

Wallets implementing the new standard may maintain the previous system to support legacy applications during a transition period or indefinitely.
Existing applications using the current Auth system should continue to operate, but immediate changes are recommended once this SIP is ratified.

## Reference Implementations

### Notes on Serialization

To ensure serializability, consider these notes:

- Enums are serialized as human-readable strings.
- BigInts are serialized as numbers, strings, or anything that can be parsed by the JavaScript BigInt constructor.
- Bytes are serialized as hex-encoded strings (without a 0x prefix).
- Predefined formats from previous SIPs are used where applicable.
- Addresses are serialized as Stacks c32-encoded strings.

> - Clarity values, post-conditions, and transactions are serialized to bytes (defined by SIP-005) and used as hex-encoded strings.

Reviewer 5: SIP-003 is also relevant here

> Note: Optional params are marked with a `?`.

Methods can be namespaced under `stx_` if used in more generic settings and other more Ethereum inspired domains.
In other cases (e.g. `WalletConnect`), the namespace may already be given by metadata (e.g. a `chainId` field) and can be omitted.
On the predominant `StacksProvider` global object, the methods can be used without a namespace, but wallets may add namespaced aliases for convenience.

##### General parameters (for transaction methods)

The following definitions can be used in the transaction methods.

Parameter properties

- `address?`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, defaults to wallets current address
- `network?`: `'mainnet' | 'testnet' | 'regtest' | 'devnet' | 'mocknet' | NetworkId`
  - where `NetworkId extends string` and can be a network identifier, which already exists in the wallet (e.g. a URL or network name)
- `fee?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `nonce?`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `postConditions?`: `PostCondition[]`, defaults to `[]`

>   - where `PostCondition` is `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation

Reviewer 5: Is there further structure to `PostCondition` you can put here, or link to?

Author: Great point added a note that this and ClarityValue are defined later in the document.

- `postConditionMode?`: `'allow' | 'deny'`
- `sponsored?`: `boolean`, defaults to `false`
- ~~`attachment?`~~ _removed_
- ~~`appDetails`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onFinish`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onCancel`~~ _removed_

---

#### Method `stx_transferStx`

> **Comment**: This method doesn't take post-conditions.

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `memo?`: `string`, defaults to `''`

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_transferSip10Ft`

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `asset`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

> #### Method `stx_transferSip9Nft`

Reviewer 4: stx_transferSip13Sft could be added as well.

Author: I can't tell if here SFTs should be treated as FTs

> Transfer
>
> (transfer ((token-id uint) (amount uint) (sender principal) (recipient principal)) (response bool uint))
> 
> Transfer a token from the sender to the recipient. It is recommended to leverage Clarity primitives like ft-transfer? to help safeguard users. The function should return (ok true) on success or an err response containing an unsigned integer on failure. The failure codes follow the existing conventions of stx-transfer? and ft-transfer?.

Reviewer 4: SFTs have one more parameter, therefore, it should be specified as well.

Reviewer 7: @janniks any comment on this. Last comment to resolve before merging.

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `asset`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix

> - `assetId`: `ClarityValue`

Reviewer 5: Is there a doc somewhere to what a `ClarityValue` type is?  If so, can you link to it in the `Parameter properties` section above?

`where`

- `ClarityValue`: `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_callContract`

Parameter properties

- `contract`: `string.string` address with contract name suffix, Stacks c32-encoded
- `functionName`: `string`
- `functionArgs`: `ClarityValue[]`, defaults to `[]`
  - where `ClarityValue` is `string | object` hex-encoded or JSON representation

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_deployContract`

Parameter properties

- `name`: `string`
- `clarityCode`: `string` Clarity contract code
- `clarityVersion?`: `number`

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

> #### Method `stx_signTransaction`
> 
> Parameter properties
> 
> - `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Method `stx_signTransaction`

Parameter properties

- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction
- `broadcast?`: `boolean` whether transaction is to be broadcast, defaults to false
```

Result properties

- `profile`: `object` updated Schema.org Person object[^13]

### Listeners

In addition to the request interface, event listeners may be provided via the `.listen` method.

- `provider.listen(event: string, listener: (...args: any[]) => void): Function`

> `provider.listen` should return a "unlisten" function, which can be called to remove the listener.

The event name should be closer to nouns than verbs and doesn't use the `on` prefix from DOM naming conventions.

#### Event `stx_accountChange`

- `listener: (accounts: {}[]) => void`

> `accounts` as defined above in `stx_getAccounts`.
> The first account is considered the default account (and may be the only "active" account in a wallet).

#### Event `stx_networkChange`

- `listener: (data: GetNetworksResult) => void`
  - where `GetNetworksResult` matches the `stx_getNetworks` result type

> This event may be emitted when the active network changes and on first load of the wallet/site.

### Error Codes

Errors thrown by request methods should match existing JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes.
This way, the user or an intermediary library can handle them in a standardized way.

> Otherwise, no additional error codes are defined in this SIP.

Reviewer 4: Common errors like "user denied request" should have a defined error code
Leather uses 4001.

Author: Added

## Preamble

SIP Number: `030`

Title: Definition of a Modern Stacks Wallet Interface Standard

Authors: [aryzing](https://github.com/aryzing), [janniks](https://github.com/janniks), [kyranjamie](https://github.com/kyranjamie), [m-aboelenein](https://github.com/m-aboelenein)

Consideration: Technical

Type: Standard

> Status: Draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status: Recommended
```

Technical CAB has voted and approved this SIP. The Status is now Recommended for the Stearing committee review

- `sponsored?`: `boolean`, defaults to `false`
- `broadcast?`: boolean whether transaction is to be broadcast, defaults to `true`
- ~~`attachment?`~~ _removed_
- ~~`appDetails`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onFinish`~~ _removed_
- ~~`onCancel`~~ _removed_

---

#### Method `stx_transferStx`

> **Comment**: This method doesn't take post-conditions.

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value
- `memo?`: `string`, defaults to `''`

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_transferSip10Ft`

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `asset`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix
- `amount`: `number | string` BigInt constructor compatible value

Result properties

- `txid`: `string` hex-encoded
- `transaction`: `string` hex-encoded raw transaction

#### Method `stx_transferSip9Nft`

Parameter properties

- `recipient`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded
- `asset`: `string` address, Stacks c32-encoded, with contract name suffix
- `assetId`: `ClarityValue`

> `where`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
where
```
